>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY, JULY 5:
GREEK VOTERS REJECT THE TERMS OF
THE EUROPEAN BAILOUT PLAN.
IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT, UNABLE
TO FIND WORK AND BEING FORCED
INTO POVERTY BECAUSE OF A
CRIMINAL RECORD.
>> I DID MY PROBATION.
NO VIOLATIONS.
MODEL CITIZEN.
I GO TO SCHOOL AND TRY TO
BETTER MYSELF, AND IT'S LIKE
EVERY TIME I APPLY FOR A JOB, I
FEEL LIKE I'M COMMITTING A
CRIME ALL OVER AGAIN.
>> Sreenivasan: AND A CLOSE
LOOK AT NATIVE AMERICAN FASHION.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
IN LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
WE START WITH GREECE, WHERE
OFFICIALS ARE PROJECTING THAT
MORE THAN 60% OF VOTERS HAVE
REJECTED AUSTERITY MEASURES
PROPOSED BY CREDITORS.
CROWDS ARE RALLYING IN THE
STREETS, CELEBRATING THE EARLY
RETURNS.
THE "NO" VOTE MEANS GREEKS DO
NOT WANT TO MAKE THE DEEP BUDGET
CUTS IN ORDER TO GET EMERGENCY
BAILOUT MONEY AS THE NATION
FALLS DEEPER INTO DEBT.
GREEK PRIME MINISTER ALEXIS
TSIPRAS SAID THAT QUOTE THE
MANDATE ASKING CALL FOR A BREAK
REQUEST EUROPE BUT RATHER GIVES
ME GREATER NEGOTIATING STRENGTH.
JOINS US FROM ATHENS FIRST OF
ALL THE REACTION ON THE STREETS
I CAN ALMOST
PBS NEWSHOUR SPECIAL
CORRESPONDENT MALCOLM BRABANT
JOINS US NOW FROM ATHENS.
HEAR THEM BEHIND YOU IN THE
CONSTITUTION SQUARE.
>> THERE IS EUPHORIA OFTEN THE
STREETS OF ATHENS TONIGHT
BECAUSE THIS RESULT IS ENTIRETY
CONSISTENT WITH THE GREEKS
NATURAL TENDENCY TOWARDS
RESISTANCE.
THIS IS SOMETHING THAT APPEALS
TO THEIR NATIONAL CHARACTER.
AT THIS STAGE PEOPLE REALLY
THOUGHT THEY HAD NOTHING MORE TO
LOSE.
THEY HAVE ENDURED FIVE YEARS OF
AUSTERITY, REALLY TOUGH TIMES.
THE GENUINE FEELING HERE IS
THINGS CAN'T GET ANY WORSE.
BUT WHAT IS HAPPENING TONIGHT IS
REALLY A STEP INTO THE UNKNOWN
BECAUSE NO ONE REALLY KNOWS WHAT
IS THE CONSEQUENCE OF THIS.
>> ARE YOU CLEAR ON WHAT A NO
VOTE MEANT AND WHAT A YES VOTE
MEANT WHEN THEY WENT TO THE
POLLS?
>> I THINK MOST PEOPLE DISTILLED
THIS DOWN TO A YES VOTE MEANING
THERE WOULD BE ABSOLUTELY MORE
AUSTERITY, YEARS OF PAIN.
WHEREAS SOME PEOPLE BELIEVED A
NO VOTE WOULD BELIEVE THERE
WOULD BE A RENEGOTIATION,
PERHAPS THE TERMS MAY HAVE BEEN
BETTER.
THERE ARE OTHERS WHO THINK BY
VOTING NO, THEY WILL BASICALLY
BE WRITING OFF THIS DEBT.
BUT THEY SEEM TO BELIEVE THE
GOVERNMENT WHEN THEY SAY THAT
MR. TSIPRAS WILL BE ABLE TO GO
BACK TO BRUSSELS WITH A BETTER
HAND.
I WAS TALKING TO A FINANCIAL
CONSULTANT TONIGHT WHO SAID THE
BANKS ARE RUNNING OUT OF PAPER
MONEY AND THERE MAY BE
NATIONALIZATION OF THE BANKS IF
THE SITUATION CONTINUES.
>> BECAUSE EVEN WITH THIS VOTE
GREECE STILL HAS ANOTHER LOAN
PAYMENT COMING IN A COUPLE OF
WEEKS RIGHT?
>> SEVERAL PAYMENTS COMING UP
AND WITHOUT ANY NEW MONEY COMING
IN, THERE'S ABSOLUTELY NO WAY
THAT GREECE CAN MAKE THOSE
PAYMENTS SO THEY'RE GOING TO
CONTINUE TO BE IN DEFAULT.
BUT WHAT I THINK THE GREEKS ARE
HOPING FOR IS THAT SOMETHING
THAT THE IMF LAST MENTIONED OVER
THE PAST WEEK OR SO THAT THERE
IS GOING TO HAVE TO BE SOME SORT
OF DEBIT RESTRUCTURING
BECAUSE -- DEBT RESTRUCTURING
BECAUSE ALL THE MONEY THROWN
INTO THE TROIKA, ALL THE MONEY
HAS GONE INTO SERVICING THE DEBT
AND ONLY A VERY, VERY SMALL
PERCENTAGE HAS ACTUALLY DONE TO
BOOSTING THE ECONOMY.
SO BASICALLY WHAT THE IMF IS
SAYING IS THAT GREECE HAS TO
HAVE MAYBE A TEN OR 15 OR 20
YEAR BREAK FROM PAYING BACK ANY
MONEY SO THAT IT CAN BASICALLY
HAVE A BREATHING SPACE AND GET
BACK ON ITS FEET.
AND NOW THIS IS SOMETHING THAT'S
GOT TO BE WORKED IDENTITY WITH
THE EUROPEANS, THEY DON'T LIKE
THAT IDEA AT ALL.
>> WHEN YOU TALK TO VOTERS
TONIGHT AFTER THEY WENT TO THE
POLLS, AFTER THEY CAST THE
BALLOTS DID YOU SEE ANY PATTERNS
HOW IT BROKE DOWN, THE YOUNG
VERSUS THE OLD, ONE VERSUS THE
OTHER?
>> YOU DO HAVE YOUNG PEOPLE
HAVING A VERY, VERY STRONG VOICE
BASE THEY HAVE BEEN THE MOST
DISADVANTAGED IN THIS AREA OF
AUSTERITY.
THE OTHER, TOTALLY INTOLERABLE
FOR THEM.
MOST PEOPLE UNDER 35 ARE
UNEMPLOYED.
50% OF YOUNG PEOPLE ARE
THIS IS A COUNTRY WITH A HIGHLY
EDUCATED YOUNG POPULATION AND
THERE'S BEEN A HUGE BRAIN DRAIN.
THIS IS A COUNTRY OF OLD PEOPLE.
WHAT THE YOUNG PEOPLE ARE
SAYING, WE ARE NEGOTIATING FOR
OUR FUTURE.
IF IT MEANS FIGHTING AND
BIT -- SUFFERING A LITTLE BIT
LONGER, WE'RE PREPARED TO DO
THAT.
THIS IS A STEP INTO THE UNKNOWN.
>> MALCOLM IS BRABANT, THANK YOU
SO MUCH.
>> Sreenivasan: SECRETARY OF
STATE JOHN KERRY MET WITH
DIPLOMATS FOR A RECORD NINTH-
STRAIGHT DAY OF NUCLEAR TALKS IN
VIENNA.
NEGOTIATORS FROM IRAN AND THE
P-5 PLUS 1 COUNTRIES, RUSSIA,
THE U.S., FRANCE, THE U.K.,
CHINA PLUS GERMANY, ARE HOPING
TO MAKE A DEAL BY JULY 7.
THE U.S. WANTS TO KEEP IRAN FROM
BUILDING A NUCLEAR WEAPON, AND
GIVE U.N. WEAPONS INSPECTORS
ACCESS TO MILITARY SITES.
THE MAIN STICKING POINT IS
IRAN'S DEMAND THAT ECONOMIC
SANCTIONS BE LIFTED BEFORE IT
MAKES CHANGES TO ITS NUCLEAR
PROGRAM.
SECRETARY KERRY CAUTIONED TODAY
THAT THE TALKS COULD STILL GO
EITHER WAY.
>> IF WE DON'T GET A DEAL, IF WE
DON'T HAVE A DEAL, IF THERE'S
ABSOLUTE INTRANSIGENCE , IF
THERE'S AN UNWILLINGNESS TO MOVE
ON THE THINGS THAT ARE
IMPORTANT, PRESIDENT OBAMA HAS
ALWAYS SAID WE'LL BE PREPARED TO
WALK AWAY.
>> Sreenivasan: IN THE MIDDLE
EAST, U.S.-LED COALITION
AIRCRAFT CARRIED OUT AT LEAST 16
AIR STRIKES AGAINST ISIS WITHIN
SYRIA SO FAR.
SOME FOCUSED SPECIFICALLY ON THE
CITY OF RAQQA.
A PRO-ISIS WEBSITE REPORTED 10
PEOPLE WERE KILLED AND DOZENS
WOUNDED, INCLUDING TWO YOUNG
BOYS.
THE U.S. MILITARY SAYS THE
ASSAULT DESTROYED ISIS TRANSIT
ROUTES, TO STOP FIGHTERS FROM
MOVING WEAPONS AND TROOPS
THROUGH SYRIA AND INTO IRAQ.
RAQQA HAS BEEN THE DE FACTO
CAPITAL OF ISIS SINCE THE
FIGHTERS DECLARED AN ISLAMIC
CALIPHATE A YEAR AGO.
GLOBAL INVESTORS ARE ALSO
MONITORING ECONOMIC TROUBLE IN
CHINA, WHERE A RECENT STOCK
MARKET FREE-FALL IS FORCING
BEIJING TO MAKE CHANGES BEFORE
TRADING OPENS MONDAY.
ACCORDING TO THE "WALL STREET
JOURNAL," CHINA HAS SUSPENDED
INITIAL PUBLIC OFFERINGS, HOPING
TO SLOW DOWN THE SELL-OFF.
CHINA'S CENTRAL BANK IS ALSO
BUYING SHARES IN CHINESE
COMPANIES IN AN EFFORT TO
STABILIZE THE MARKET.
AT THE SAME TIME, 21 CHINESE
BROKERAGE FIRMS COLLECTIVELY
PROMISED ASSISTANCE AND WILL
INVEST AT LEAST $19 BILLION OF
THEIR OWN MONEY TO BUY STOCKS.
CHINA'S STOCK MARKET HAS LOST
ALMOST $3 TRILLION IN VALUE JUST
SINCE LAST MONTH.
>> Sreenivasan: THE MIGRANT
CRISIS IN EUROPE IS CAUSING
MAJOR DISRUPTIONS ON BOTH ENDS
OF THE TUNNEL THAT CONNECTS
ENGLAND AND FRANCE.
SECURITY OFFICERS TEMPORARILY
HALTED EUROTUNNEL SERVICE TWICE
IN THE LAST TWO WEEKS, STRANDING
TRAIN PASSENGERS AND BLOCKING
VEHICLE TRAFFIC.
TRUCKS THAT CARRY GOODS FROM
ACROSS EUROPE ARE WAITING IN
LONG LINES.
ITN'S PETER SMITH REPORTS ON HOW
MIGRANTS ARE MANAGING TO CROSS
THE BORDER.
>> A BRITISH LORRY DRIVER FILMED
THIS.
HAVING GONE THROUGH THREE
SCREENINGS, SECURITY CHECKS AND
BORDER PAROLE PAROLE -- PROM.
THE NEXT CHECKS DON'T GO UNTIL
HE GETS TO BRITAIN.
BUT A LINE OF MIGRANTS ARE
CLEARLY SEEN WHERE THEY ARE
THOUGHT MEANT TO BE.
NOBODY SEES THEM, DELIVERING
CARGO DIRECTLY INTO THE U.K.
THIS GROUP IS WALKING CASUALLY
UNCONCERNED BEING RUSHED AND
UNCHALLENGED.
THEY EACH QUEUE UP IN SINGLE
FILE AND HAVE TIME TO LOOK
AROUND FOR BEST SPOT TO HIDE.
IN THE HOURS THAT FOLLOWED, 150
MIGRANTS DESPERATELY STORMED THE
CALLAIS TERMINAL CAUSING
SERVICES TO BE DELAYED AND
CANCELLED.
ANOTHER MAN AIMING TO GET INTO
BE THE TRAIN IS SEEN RUNNING AND
JUMPING ONTO THE TRACKS.
YARDS AWAY.
THEY APPEAR TO WORK OUT THIS
FRENCH PORT BUT THEY DON'T STEP
IN.
INSTEAD, A THUMBS UP AND A WAVE.
THE MAN WHO RECORDED THESE
INCREDIBLE PICTURES TOLD US WHY
HE DECIDED TO CAPTURE IT ON HIS
PHONE.
>> WELL IT'S GETTING OUT OF
HAND.
THERE'S HUNDREDS.
I MEAN WHAT I'VE SEEN THERE OF A
NIGHT SOMETIME, THE THERE ARE
TIM MORE.
>> WE PUT OUR FOOTAGE TO EURO
TUNNEL THE COMPANY THAT RUNS THE
CROSS CHANNEL ROUTE.
A SPOKESPERSON TELLS US THEY
NEED BRITISH AND FRENCH BE
AUTHORITIES TO PROVIDE MORE
SECURITY.
>> THIS IS GOING TO BE SOLVED BY
HARD DECISIONS TAKEN BY THE EU
WHICH IS THE PORT OF ENTRY, AT
LAMPEDUSA, AND CALMAIS AND IN
GREECE.
>> A SHANTY TOWN FOR DESPERATE
PEOPLE WHO ARE WAITING.
THEIR WILL TO MAKE IT ACROSS THE
CHANNEL WILL ONCE AGAIN BE
PITTED AGAINST THOSE WHO ARE
EMPLOYED TO STOP THEM.
>> Sreenivasan: AND NOW TO OUR
SIGNATURE SEGMENT.
TONIGHT, THE DEBATE ABOUT
EMPLOYER BACKGROUND CHECKS.
HOW FAR BACK SHOULD THEY GO?
A GROWING NUMBER OF STATES ARE
OPTING TO BAN THE BOX THAT ASKS
ABOUT CRIMINAL RECORDS ON JOB
APPLICATIONS.
BUT WITH EVIDENCE CRIMINAL
RECORDS COULD BE DRIVING PEOPLE
INTO POVERTY, A NEW PROPOSAL TO
SEAL PAST OFFENSES IS NOW ON THE
TABLE.
THE NEWSHOUR'S STEPHEN FEE HAS
OUR STORY FROM PHILADELPHIA,
WHICH WE ORIGINALLY BROUGHT YOU
IN JANUARY.
>> Reporter: EVERY AFTERNOON, AT
HIS DINING ROOM TABLE, 36-YEAR-
OLD RONALD LEWIS DOES HIS
HOMEWORK.
BY DAY, HE'S A STUDENT, LEARNING
TO FIX HEATING AND AIR
CONDITIONING SYSTEMS, AND HE
LOOKS AFTER HIS THREE KIDS.
HE ALSO WORKS THE NIGHT SHIFT,
RUNNING HIGH PRESSURE BOILERS AT
A CHEMICAL PLANT HERE IN HIS
HOMETOWN, PHILADELPHIA.
>> I'M A FATHER.
I'M A HARD WORKER.
I'M VERY AMBITIOUS.
>> Reporter: HE'S ALSO GOT A
CRIMINAL RECORD.
A DECADE AGO, LEWIS HAD TWO
MAJOR RUN-INS WITH THE LAW THAT
HE SAYS HAVE INTERFERED WITH HIS
JOB PROSPECTS EVER SINCE.
IN AUGUST 2004, HE WAS PICKED UP
DURING A DRUG ARREST ALONGSIDE
HIS BROTHER.
LEWIS WAS CARRYING A
.9 MILLIMETER HANDGUN.
DAYS LATER HE WAS NABBED FOR
STEALING A POCKETBOOK FROM A
DEPARTMENT STORE.
SO WHAT WAS THAT LIKE, AND WHAT
HAPPENED AT THAT STAGE AFTER
THEY ARRESTED YOU?
>> IT WAS LIFE CHANGING.
BUT IT WASN'T A GOOD FEELING.
IT WASN'T A GOOD FEELING,
BECAUSE YOU FELT LIKE YOU
DISAPPOINTED YOUR FAMILY, AND
YOU DISAPPOINTED YOUR MOTHER,
WHICH IS THE MOST IMPORTANT
PERSON IN MY LIFE.
>> Reporter: ON THE SUGGESTION
OF HIS LAWYER, LEWIS TOOK A
DEAL.
FOR BOTH CASES, HE PLED GUILTY
TO A TOTAL OF THREE MISDEMEANORS
AND WAS SENTENCED TO FIVE YEARS'
PROBATION.
NO JAIL TIME.
AT THAT TIME, WERE YOU WORRIED
AT ALL ABOUT HOW THIS MIGHT
IMPACT YOUR FUTURE?
>> NO.
BECAUSE THE LAWYER HAD TOLD ME,
"IT'S ONLY A MISDEMEANOR.
IT'S NEVER GOING TO HURT YOU.
DON'T EVEN WORRY ABOUT IT."
SO NO, I REALLY DIDN'T THINK
THAT MUCH INTO IT AT THAT POINT.
>> Reporter: A SHORT TIME LATER,
LEWIS BEGAN LOOKING FOR NEW
WORK.
HE WAS OVERJOYED WHEN HE GOT A
TENTATIVE JOB OFFER FROM A
BUILDING COMPANY.
>> I WORKED THERE FOR ABOUT A
MONTH, WAS HONEST WITH THEM.
TOLD THEM, YOU KNOW, WHAT WAS ON
MY RECORD.
THEY STILL HIRED ME.
WE'RE WORKING.
SO I WORK THERE ABOUT A MONTH.
THEY CALLED ME IN THE OFFICE AND
SAID, "YOUR RECORD CAME BACK.
WE'VE GOT TO LET YOU GO."
>> Reporter: AND THAT WAS IT?
EVEN THOUGH YOU HAD DISCLOSED
EVERYTHING?
YOU WERE NEVER DISHONEST IN THE
HIRING PROCESS?
>> NEVER DISHONEST.
NEVER.
THEY LOOKED SO SCARED OF ME, IT
WAS A SHAME.
>> Reporter: WHAT DO YOU MEAN?
>> WHEN THEY, WE'VE GOT TO GET
YOU OUT OF HERE.
WE'VE GOT TO GET YOU OFF THE
PREMISES.
>> Reporter: LEWIS SAYS THAT
SCENARIO PLAYED OUT OVER AND
OVER AGAIN.
LATER ON, HE HAD TWO OFFERS THAT
WERE THEN REVOKED.
HE HAD PROMISING PHONE CALLS
WITH ANOTHER COMPANY THAT WENT
NOWHERE.
HE SAYS THE ONLY EXPLANATION HE
RECEIVED: THE EXISTENCE OF
CRIMES IN HIS PAST.
FOUR OF THOSE COMPANIES DECLINED
TO DISCUSS LEWIS' CASE WITH US.
THERE ARE PEOPLE WHO ARE GOING
TO WATCH THIS, AND THEY'RE GOING
TO SAY, "YOU KNOW WHAT?
YOU WEREN'T A KID.
YOU WERE 25.
YOU WERE AN ADULT.
YOU KNEW WHAT YOU WERE DOING.
AND THAT THIS IS A CONSEQUENCE,
THIS IS A CONSEQUENCE OF YOUR
ACTIONS."
>> IF YOU SHOW ME ONE PERSON
THAT HASN'T MADE A MISTAKE, THEN
I WON'T APPLY NOWHERE ELSE.
>> Reporter: NINE IN TEN
COMPANIES IN THE U.S. CONDUCT
BACKGROUND CHECKS, AND WITH RAP
SHEETS WIDELY AVAILABLE ONLINE,
ADVOCATES SAY PEOPLE WITH
CRIMINAL BACKGROUNDS, SOMETIMES
JUST AN ARREST RECORD, NO
CONVICTION, ARE BEING BLOCKED
FROM EMPLOYMENT.
THEY SAY IT'S DRIVING A GROWING
NUMBER OF PEOPLE INTO POVERTY.
AND THAT RONALD LEWIS' CASE IS
HARDLY UNIQUE.
>> IT'S VERY COMMON.
WE SEE CLIENTS COME IN WITH
VARIATIONS OF HIS STORY ON A
DAILY BASIS.
>> Reporter: SHARON DIETRICH IS
NOW RONALD LEWIS' LAWYER.
SHE DIDN'T REPRESENT HIM IN THE
ORIGINAL CRIMINAL CASES.
SHE'S ALSO THE LITIGATION
DIRECTOR AT COMMUNITY LEGAL
SERVICES OF PHILADELPHIA.
>> WE SERVE THE LOW-INCOME
COMMUNITY OF PHILADELPHIA,
BASICALLY UNEMPLOYED AND LOW-
WAGE WORKERS IN PHILADELPHIA.
AND IT'S THE SINGLE MOST COMMON
REASON PEOPLE COME TO US FOR
HELP IS BECAUSE THEY HAVE A
CRIMINAL RECORD THAT HAS BEEN
KEEPING THEM FROM GETTING A JOB.
>> Reporter: LAST YEAR, THE
"WALL STREET JOURNAL," USING
DATA FROM THE UNIVERSITY OF
SOUTH CAROLINA, REPORTED THAT
AMERICANS WITH A CRIMINAL
CONVICTION BY AGE 23 HAVE HIGHER
UNEMPLOYMENT RATES, MAKE LESS
MONEY, AND ARE TWICE AS LIKELY
TO END UP IN POVERTY AS THEIR
PEERS.
>> THE REALITY IS THAT WITH THE
RISE OF TECHNOLOGY AND REALLY
WITH THE PROLIFERATION OF
BACKGROUND CHECKS IN THIS NATION
IN REALLY EVERY WALK OF LIFE
FROM EMPLOYMENT TO HOUSING, A
CRIMINAL RECORD NOW CARRIES
OFTEN LIFELONG BARRIERS TO BASIC
BUILDING BLOCKS OF ECONOMIC
SECURITY.
>> Reporter: REBECCA VALLAS IS A
LAWYER AND POVERTY EXPERT AT THE
LEFT-LEANING CENTER FOR AMERICAN
PROGRESS IN WASHINGTON.
SHE AND SHARON DIETRICH, RONALD
LEWIS' LAWYER, PUBLISHED A
REPORT LAST YEAR LINKING POVERTY
AND CRIMINAL BACKGROUNDS,
ESPECIALLY AMONG BLACK MEN.
>> AND SO IT'S REALLY AN
INCREDIBLY PERVASIVE PROBLEM
THAT IMPACTS WHOLE SEGMENTS OF
OUR COMMUNITY.
BUT IT-- THIS ISSUE ALSO REALLY
DISPROPORTIONATELY IMPACTS
COMMUNITIES OF COLOR.
>> Reporter: EMPLOYERS SAY THEY
AREN'T JUST SHUTTING OUT
EVERYONE WITH A CRIMINAL PAST,
THEY'RE BEING CAREFUL AND
COMPLYING WITH GUIDELINES FROM
THE FEDERAL EQUAL EMPLOYMENT
OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION MEANT TO
GIVE PEOPLE SECOND CHANCES.
THAT'S ACCORDING TO BETH MILITO
AT THE NATIONAL FEDERATION OF
INDEPENDENT BUSINESSES, WHICH
REPRESENTS 350,000 SMALL
BUSINESSES.
A CYNICAL PART OF ME SAYS, "HEY,
IF I SAT DOWN AND, BOY, IT LOOKS
LIKE SOMEONE'S GOT A CRIMINAL
RECORD AND THEN I'VE GOT ANOTHER
CANDIDATE WHO DOESN'T, I'M GOING
TO GO WITH THE GUY WHO DOESN'T
HAVE THE CRIMINAL RECORD,"
RIGHT?
>> MAYBE, MAYBE NOT.
I THINK IT DEPENDS ON THE NATURE
OF THE JOB.
THE EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY
COMMISSION ISSUED NEW GUIDANCE
IN APRIL OF 2012.
AND IT REITERATES THAT WHERE AT
ALL POSSIBLE IT'S GOOD FOR A
BUSINESS TO CONSIDER THREE
FACTORS: THE NATURE OF THE
CRIME, THE TIME THAT'S ELAPSED
SINCE THE CRIME AND THE NATURE
OF THE JOB.
AND WHEN AT ALL POSSIBLE TO MAKE
AN INDIVIDUALIZED ASSESSMENT.
AND I THINK MANY EMPLOYERS WILL
DO THAT.
>> Reporter: 100 CITIES,
INCLUDING PHILADELPHIA, NEW
YORK, DETROIT, CHARLOTTE, AND
ORLANDO, ALONG WITH 18 STATES,
NOW PROHIBIT EMPLOYERS FROM
ASKING JOB APPLICANTS TO CHECK A
BOX ADMITTING IF THEY HAVE A
CRIMINAL RECORD.
11 STATE BANS APPLY ONLY TO
GOVERNMENT AGENCIES.
SEVEN STATES ALSO PROHIBIT
PRIVATE EMPLOYERS FROM ASKING
ABOUT CONVICTIONS.
BUT VALLAS AND DIETRICH'S REPORT
FOR THE CENTER FOR AMERICAN
PROGRESS WANTS TO GO A STEP
FURTHER, AND SEAL LOW-LEVEL,
NONVIOLENT CRIMINAL OFFENSES
THAT TOOK PLACE MORE THAN TEN
YEARS AGO.
ACCORDING TO REBECCA VALLAS, THE
DATA SHOW THAT AFTER A DECADE,
NONVIOLENT OFFENDERS ARE NO MORE
LIKELY TO COMMIT A CRIME THAN
ANYONE ELSE, SO THEIR RECORDS
SHOULDN'T BE PART OF THE HIRING
PROCESS AT ALL.
>> WE REALLY HAVE POLICIES IN
PLACE THAT TREAT A PERSON AS A
CRIMINAL LONG AFTER THEY REALLY
POSE ANY SIGNIFICANT RISK OF
EVER RE-OFFENDING.
AND IT REALLY DOESN'T MAKE MUCH
SENSE TO BE SHUTTING SOMEONE OUT
OF OPPORTUNITIES TO ACCESS A JOB
FOR INSTANCE, BECAUSE OF
MISCONCEPTIONS ABOUT WHO THAT
PERSON MIGHT BE AND THE RISK
THAT THEY MIGHT POSE TO PUBLIC
SAFETY.
>> Reporter: BUT BETH MILITO AT
THE NATIONAL FEDERATION OF
INDEPENDENT BUSINESSES SAYS
EMPLOYERS FACE MAJOR RISKS, AND
EVEN POTENTIAL NEGLIGENT HIRING
LAWSUITS, IF A PAST OFFENDER
COMMITS A CRIME ON THE JOB.
AND FOR SMALL BUSINESS OWNERS
ESPECIALLY, THEIR REPUTATIONS
COULD BE ON THE LINE.
>> HIRING DECISIONS ARE
CHALLENGING.
AND THEY NEED THIS INFORMATION.
THEY CAN'T TURN A BLIND EYE.
TOO MUCH IS AT RISK.
THEY CAN'T TURN A BLIND EYE TO
CRIMINAL HISTORY.
IT'D BE FOOLISH TO.
YOU KNOW, THERE'S PEOPLE,
PROPERTY AT STAKE.
>> Reporter: SOMEONE MIGHT BE
WATCHING THIS AND THEY SAY, "YOU
KNOW WHAT?
I WOULDN'T TRUST YOU AT MY
BUSINESS."
HOW DO YOU DEFEND YOURSELF TO
THAT CHARGE?
>> WHAT I SAY TO THEM IS IT WAS
2004, AND I'M PRETTY SURE IF YOU
MADE A MISTAKE IN 2004, YOU
DON'T KNOW WHAT YOUR MISTAKE
WAS.
BUT MINE IS DOCUMENTED.
SO YOU KNOW WHAT MY MISTAKE IS.
AND LOOK AT THE POSITIVE THINGS
I'VE DONE SINCE 2004.
SO IF YOU'RE GONNA HANG YOUR HAT
ON JUST 2004, THEN YOU PROBABLY
AREN'T THE PERSON I WANT TO WORK
FOR ANYWAY.
>> Reporter: DO YOU THINK AN
EMPLOYER DOESN'T HAVE THE RIGHT
TO KNOW WHAT HAPPENED IN YOUR
PAST?
>> EMPLOYERS SHOULD KNOW--
SHOULD KNOW WHO THEY'RE HIRING.
IT'S FAIR.
YOU- YOU SHOULD KNOW.
BUT YOU SHOULD ALSO REMEMBER
THAT THESE ARE LIVES WE'RE--
THESE ARE PEOPLE'S LIVES WE'RE
TALKING ABOUT.
IT'S LIKE IF ALMOST DOUBLE
JEOPARDY.
JUST LOOK AT IT LIKE THIS.
I SERVE MY-- I DID MY PROBATION.
NO VIOLATIONS.
MODEL CITIZEN.
I GO TO SCHOOL AND TRY TO BETTER
MYSELF, AND I'M-- IT'S LIKE
EVERY TIME I APPLY FOR A JOB, I
FEEL LIKE I'M COMMITTING A CRIME
ALL OVER AGAIN.
>> Reporter: THIS SPRING, LEWIS
FINISHED HIS TRAINING COURSE AND
IS NOW LOOKING FOR WORK.
HE'S SUBMITTED TWO PARDON
APPLICATIONS TO PENNSYLVANIA TO
CLEAR HIS RECORD, AND WHILE BOTH
HAVE BEEN REJECTED, HE PLANS ON
RE-SUBMITTING THEM IN THE NEAR
FUTURE.
>> Sreenivasan: FOR A RUNDOWN OF
EVERYTHING YOU SHOULD WATCH FOR
IN TONIGHT'S WOMEN'S WORLD CUP
FINAL BETWEEN THE U.S. AND
JAPAN, WATCH AN INTERVIEW WITH
FORMER U.S. GOALKEEPER BRIANA
SCURRY.
VISIT pbs.org/newshour.
>> Sreenivasan: THE MITCHELL
MUSEUM OF THE AMERICAN INDIAN IN
EVANSTON, ILLINOIS HAS DELVED
DEEP INTO ITS ARCHIVES FOR ITS
LATEST EXHIBIT.
ON DISPLAY ARE THE CUSTOM
CLOTHES AND ADORNMENTS OF NATIVE
AMERICANS FROM ACROSS THE UNITED
STATES AND CANADA.
IT'S PART OF A YEAR-LONG LOOK AT
NATIVE AMERICAN FASHION WORN IN
CEREMONIES, CELEBRATIONS, AND
EVEN ON RUNWAYS.
THIS STORY IS FROM OUR
COLLEAGUES AT WTTW IN CHICAGO.
PHIL PONCE REPORTS.
>> Reporter: FROM ELK TEETH, AND
PORCUPINE QUILLS, TO WOVEN
FABRIC, BEADS, AND ANIMAL HIDE.
FOR CENTURIES, NATIVE AMERICAN
ARTISANS HAVE MADE EXQUISITE
DESIGNS FROM WHATEVER MATERIALS
WERE AT HAND.
MOST ITEMS ON VIEW ARE NOT EVERY
DAY OUTFITS AND JEWELRY, BUT
WERE MADE FOR SPECIAL OCCASIONS
AND PEOPLE OF HONOR.
>> MOSTLY THE LEADERS WITHIN THE
COMMUNITIES WORE THE ELABORATE
GARMENTS.
YOU MIGHT HAVE BEEN A VERY
HIGHER STATUS MEMBER BUT YOU HAD
A RESPONSIBILITY TO PROVIDE FOR
THE REST OF THE COMMUNITY TOO.
WE WERE WANTING TO HIGHLIGHT
NATIVE FASHION IN THE SENSE OF
BEFORE CONTACT, MAKING EUROPEAN
CONTACT.
>> Reporter: NATIVE AMERICANS
ALSO EMBRACED NEW CRAFTS FROM
EUROPE, INCLUDING METALWORK, AND
BEADS WHICH OFTEN REPLACED THE
QUILLWORK IN THEIR EARLIER
DESIGNS.
THE DESIGNS HELPED IDENTIFY THE
WEARER.
>> WHETHER THAT WAS BY A DESIGN
A BEAD DESIGN UTILIZED FOR
SPECIFIC TRIBE OR TECHNIQUE AND
DEFINITELY SYMBOLS COULD BE A
SPIRITUAL CONNECTION, COULD ALSO
REPRESENT CLANS WITHIN THE
FAMILY UNIT.
>> A LOT OF THE REGIONAL
DIFFERENCES BETWEEN THE DESIGNS
AND THE TYPES OF MATERIAL BEING
USED ARE SHOWN IN WHAT PEOPLE
ARE CHOOSING TO PUT INTO THE
MORE ELABORATE OUTFITS AND
REGALIA.
THOSE MATERIALS ARE IMPORTANT
MATERIALS TO EXPRESS THEIR
CULTURE LOCALLY BUT THEY ALSO
SOMETIMES INCORPORATE PIECES
THAT EXPRESS THEIR TRADE
CAPACITY, THE ABILITY TO BRING
MACAW FEATHERS FROM SOUTH
AMERICA ALL THE WAY UP TO THE
PLAINS TO ME THAT'S A VERY
IMPRESSIVE FEAT TO DO WHEN YOU
DON'T HAVE CARS OR TRAINS FOR
TRANSIT.
>> Reporter: THE MITCHELL MUSEUM
ALSO LOOKS AT MORE CONTEMPORARY
NATIVE AMERICAN CREATIONS.
WHETHER MODERN OR TRADITIONAL,
NATIVE DESIGNERS HAVE KEPT THEIR
CULTURAL IDENTITY ALIVE WITHIN
THE WORLD OF HIGH FASHION.
>> IT'S VERY INTERESTING HOW SO
MUCH THE INTERPLAY OF CULTURES
TAKES PLACE BUT WHAT THEY'RE
PRODUCING IS VERY OBVIOUS TO
STILL MAINTAINING THE CULTURE.
THE BEADWORK THAT COMES IN, THE
DIFFERENT MASS-MANUFACTURED
CLOTH MATERIAL THAT COMES IN,
THE METALWORKING THAT COMES IN,
THEY REALLY MAKE IT THEIR OWN
UNIQUE NATIVE AMERICAN DESIGNS
AND STYLES.
>> Sreenivasan: ON MONDAY'S
NEWSHOUR, JEFFREY BROWN REPORTS
FROM THE CONCERT EVENT OF THE
SUMMER.
AFTER 50 YEARS, THE GRATEFUL
DEAD PLAY THEIR FINAL SHOWS AT
SOLDIER FIELD IN CHICAGO.
JEFF SAT DOWN WITH ONE OF THE
BAND'S ORIGINAL MEMBERS, DRUMMER
BILL KREUTZMANN.
>> I WANT TO DO IT FOR THE FANS
AGAIN.
WE HAD SUCH SUCH AMAZING
SUPPORT.
>> Sreenivasan: AND NOW TO
VIEWERS LIKE YOU, YOU'RE CHANCE
TO COMMENT ON OUR WORK.
THERE WERE MANY COMMENTS
FOLLOWING LAST WEEK'S STORY
ABOUT TOXIC STRESS AND THE
EFFECT THAT STRESS CAN HAVE ON
THE DEVELOPING BRAINS OF
CHILDREN.
LEE ELIOTT SPOKE ABOUT HER
PERSONAL EXPERIENCE:
"I WAS A SINGLE MOTHER MAKING
$4.10 AN HOUR.
MY MIND WAS CONSTANTLY
STIMULATED BY THINKING OF DECENT
MEALS FOR MY CHILDREN, KEEPING
MY HOME AND MY CHILDREN CLEAN
AND CONSTANTLY LOOKING FOR WAYS
TO IMPROVE OUR LIVES.
MY CHILDREN ARE NOW HARD WORKING
COLLEGE GRADUATES.
YOU CAN TRIUMPH OVER POVERTY IF
YOU SET YOUR MIND ON IT."
DIANA MOSES ASKED ABOUT THE
PROCESS OF ASSISTING THOSE IN
STRESSFUL SITUATIONS:"
... I WONDER WHETHER THE SOCIAL
AND EMOTIONAL SUPPORT FROM OTHER
ADULT HUMAN BEINGS LIGHTENING
THE LOAD BY THEIR INVOLVEMENT
ALSO CONTRIBUTED TO THIS
MOTHER'S PROGRESS.
I MEAN, SUPPOSE THE MEDS AND
CAMP REFERRALS AND PARENTING
TIPS (AND SO ON) HAD BEEN
PROVIDED WITH MUCH LESS HUMAN-
TO-HUMAN CONTACT, WOULD THE SAME
PROGRESS HAVE BEEN MADE?"
SONIA LEVY KUNGLI ADDED SIMPLY:
"LABELING THE STRESS "TOXIC" IS
TOXIC."
BRANDI JOHNSON BAILEY SAID:
"POVERTY IS LIKE LIVING IN AN
INVISIBLE CAGE.
EVENTUALLY IT BREAKS THEIR
SPIRIT AND ULTIMATELY, THEM."
SOME COMMENTED THAT THE EFFECT
OF STRESS ISN'T LIMITED TO THE
UNDERPRIVILEGED:
GRACE CURRAN BROCK SAID:
"THIS ISN'T JUST HAPPENING TO
POOR KIDS.
MIDDLE CLASS AND RICH KIDS CAN
GROW UP WITH DOMESTIC VIOLENCE."
BETTY SCARPELLINO ADDED:
"UNFORTUNATELY UNEARNED EARLY
WEALTH SEEMS TO HAVE A SAD
IMPACT ON MANY BRAINS TOO.
EMPATHY DESTROYED!"
AND THERE WAS THIS FROM ROBERT
PHILLIPS:
"I'D LIKE TO SEE MORE RESEARCH
ON THIS SUBJECT FOR DIFFERENT
AGE GROUPS.
I'D BET EVEN LATE ONSET (I.E.
ADULTS WHO GREW UP WELL PROVIDED
THEN LOST CAREERS LATER IN LIFE)
HAVE MAJOR BRAIN ADAPTATION OVER
A SEVERAL YEAR PERIOD."
AS ALWAYS WE WELCOME YOUR
COMMENTS.
VISIT US ONLINE AT
pbs.org/newshour, ON OUR
FACEBOOK PAGE, OR TWEET US AT
@NEWSHOUR.
>> FINALLY TONIGHT THE ALAMO AND
FOUR NEIGHBORING CATHOLIC
MISSIONS IN TEXAS HAVE BEEN
DECLARED UNESCO WORLD HERITAGE
SIGHTS.
OTHERS IN THE AREA WERE AWARDED,
FRANCE'S CHAMPAGNE REGION.
THREE TONS OF SUPPLIES TO THE
TWO RUSSIAN HE AND ONE AMERICAN
ON BOARD.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
THANKS FOR WATCHING, GOOD NIGHT.